#!/bin/bash
echo "
This story will break all your stereotypes about what professional education is
and that university is a mandatory step in achieving career success. As
the example of Denis Zuev, a guy from the Russian backwoods shows, today one
can generally refuse to receive classical technical education in Russia or
Abroad, but at the same time become a world level IT specialist.There is not
more than a dozen professionals around the world equal to Denis. He does not
have a diploma, but he provides trainings for Apple, Microsoft and Google
employees. And Cisco invites him to develop their certification exams.

The best thing about Denis and his professional successes is a mysterious line
that serves as a signature in his e-mails: 6xRHCA | 6xCCIE | 4xJNCIE | CCDE |
HCIE | VCIX-NV. If you are not familar with from network administration, it may
look like a cipher. But those who understand, know how much blood and sweat
stands behind this high level of professional training. People like Denis spend
years without a day off or a vacation, perfecting their self-discipline and
purposefulness. 'HiTech' tells you a story about how an ordinary IT specialist
from a small company turned into a world level specialist.
Hopefully, it will inspire many of you.

- Denis, tell us about yourself.

- For more than 10 years I have been busy with many things related to IT. But
we can say that my acquaintance with this industry began with computer network
games. When I was in school, I professionally engaged in e-sports: I won
competitions, I had contracts, advertisers. I've been preparing for the Quake,
Starcraft, Warcraft competitions for months. He took places at All-Russian
tournaments. But at some point I realized that it's time to tie with toys and
look for a normal job. Then I worked as a system administrator in Tyumen: my
acquaintances arranged for me at the Research Institute of Tyumen Oil and Gas
University. I liked it and I decided to develop in this direction.

- Did you go to college?

- Not really. I understood that IT is valued for the newest approaches, the
latest practices. Who knows about them, who can apply them, that will be
successful. At that time, nobody in the industry looked at education. When I
came to the interviews, the basic requirements were technical skills. However,
neither in Tyumen, nor in Moscow there were no suitable universities. If they
were close by specialization, they gave such information, that with it only in
the coffin.

Then I decided that the only thing that higher education can help me is to
teach English. And already with it on special trainings and courses it will be
possible to develop independently. Before that, I went around a lot of language
schools, but everywhere there was a level that was not enough for me. In the
end, I chose the department of Romano-Germanic philology at the Tyumen State
University. I had exactly one and a half years to raise my level of language to
the necessary in a professional career.

I started to understand the documentation, I understood what the profile
resources are about. I completely left the university for professional work.
But this does not mean that education has ended, on the contrary, it has just
begun. The way of constant certification and confirmation of all new and new
skill levels has begun. I studied every day. In my work on the level of an
unfamiliar person, first of all, his expert degrees or certifications that he
received are the same ciphers from the signature in the e-mail. They give any
HR-u much more information than any words.

- Every major vendor: Cisco, Huawei, Red Hat has its own system of
certification of specialists. All of them, as a rule, are divided into three
levels: novice, professional and expert - the highest and most complex. You
have a complete set of all certificates, including the most complex ones.

- In terms of time and effort, getting these degrees is probably not inferior
to getting a higher education or an MBA. Such certificates have an
international level. In any country, in any company, they know what these
certificates mean and what is behind them.

In the same Cisco expert you can become in several areas: Routing and
Switching, Service Provider, Security, Wireless, Storage, etc. At least one of
them is already an achievement in obtaining a degree of an expert, there will
always be a demand for such a specialist, because their system of certification
is recognized by the whole community. I could not stop at one - the appetite
comes with eating. After receiving the next certificate, I understood how much
I do not yet know. It got to the point that I was one of the few in the world
who got everything.

- Tell me more about the history of certification, why do you need it?

- Professional certification and obtaining expert levels in the network
industry - an important story for both a novice specialist and an expert in the
IT industry - they are judged by a specialist. This is a kind of diplomas about
education that are accepted in any world company. There are several directions
and levels of certification, they depend on the vendor. One of the most
extensive, complex and recognized by all certification systems from Cisco is
Cisco Certified Internetwork Expert (CCIE). Levels of this system are given
only to those specialists who managed to pass an extremely difficult 8-hour
exam consisting of a large number of tasks. These exams are created by a team
of world-class experts. To hand it over is tantamount to, if not getting a
Nobel Prize, then, say, obtaining permission to build a skyscraper in the
center of the capital. At the moment I have received all the expert
certifications from Cisco Systems - these are the same CCIE, all the expert
levels of Juniper Networks are JNCIE. There are 6 expert levels of Red Hat -
RHCA, and others.

- And how to prepare for this?

- I will not lie - it's very difficult, but it's worth it. For me, the first
and most important point was self-sacrifice and a prioritization. Without this,
it is very difficult to achieve a high result. Here I was helped by
professional e-sports lessons in my childhood. Then I had to spend 18 hours a
day for several months in preparation for the competition. This is absolutely
different from the game for the sake of fun. You have to concentrate, control
yourself, play with the same people. Not everyone can withstand such a test.
The level of control and concentration that I acquired while playing helped me
a lot in achieving professional success.

When you are preparing for free time, there is no remaining. My main training
took place in Moscow, where I worked in parallel. It turned out that there was
no days off or free time. Only sleep, work and study. I came to work by 10am.
left at 12 noon. An hour spent in the gym, at 1:30 went to bed, and then the
circle repeated again. And it lasted three years.

The second important point for me was to find the right landmark, a star I'd
like to approach - a person who, having about the same initial data, achieved
the best result in the professional field I chose. In my case, Peter Lapukhov
became such an example. This is a well-known expert in the field of
administration and networking. At that time, he managed to get 4 CCIE expert
certification in 16 months. He was a legend in the industry, he was known all
over the world. For me, his achievements seemed unimaginable. But I thought, if
he could - I can. In the end, I even overtook him. Now he also works in the
Silicon Valley.

The third point necessary in the preparation is the experience in this field.
It is necessary not only to work with this or that equipment or software, but
try to be an expert, to delve into the smallest details and do not forget to
share your knowledge, and be open to them. Without cooperation with the 'iron',
progress is impossible.

- It is expensive?

- All this takes a lot of resources. This is not only time and physical
resources, but also very big money. To teach theory is not enough. We have to
deal with equipment for millions of dollars. It is impossible to buy, it is
often difficult to find, you have to rent to learn. I somehow calculated that
for one of the expert degrees I took $ 15,000: it's training, equipment rent,
the exam itself. After that, I decided that I would not take money, so that the
money spent would not frighten me. I do not know the total amount, but every
exam for an expert is at least several thousand dollars.

- The official statistics of Cisco Systems says that at the first attempt only
3% of those who try. How did you pass these exams?

- Basically IT experts pass these exams from the 2 nd or 3 rd attempt - this is
again time, again a waste of big money. Usually the process of preparing for
one such exam takes an average of about a year. In my case, I managed to get
all 7 available at the moment CCIE expert certifications for 18 months and
everything from the first attempt is an unofficial world record. There is a
website where statistics are collected. There are almost 19,000 experts from
all over the world, but only I managed to manage for such a short time.

- What do you get after the exams?

- I think I will not find a person who does not pay off all his investments in
obtaining expert degrees. They are listed all over the world, by all companies.
In my case, after the first degree, my salary increased by 35%, after the
second by 25%, after the third you do not think about money. Automatically with
obtaining all degrees you get fame in the world community. You are called to
conduct trainings, advise, act as a mentor. Happens, in a month I receive more
for consultations and training, than on the basic work.

- Who appeals to you for training and how much does it cost?

- Differently. Everyone turns: from private specialists to entire companies. I
basically do not take newcomers, because I think it's a waste of time, money
and energy. I advise them to use a mass of available materials and resources. I
only take high-level specialists. Prices vary from $ 500 to $ 7000. It depends
on the case, on the problem, on who comes: the company or person as a private
person. For a long time, many students have become friends. In this case, we
can simply chat on the topic of interest.

If you look at what companies come to me to study and consult, then they are
leading experts from Cisco Systems, IBM, Google, Microsoft, AT & T, Verizon,
Twitter, Visa, Apple, Dropbox and others. As a rule, I conduct classes with
them in the form of closed trainings, each time it is its own unique program.

- Degrees and certifications are still funds that help in career and work. And
what are you doing now, where you worked before, what major projects were there?

- My clients are basically the largest telecom companies, service providers,
very large enterprise-enterprises from the banking sector, from retail.
Unfortunately, current projects are protected by a nondisclosure agreement, but
I can say that they were ATT, Verizon, Cisco Systems, Juniper Networks,
Microsoft, Google, Bloomberg, HP, Dell. There are also a lot of startups that
the whole world will find out in just a year and a half. There was a big case
with CenturyLink, an American telecommunications company that ranks third in
the US in the industry after AT & T and Verizon, and has one of the largest
long-haul lines. For them we did from scratch a project on IP TV. If you
remember Russia, then basically there were major state projects. In Tyumen we
built the presidential library and fully provided the network, servers, backup
storage. There were also Rostelecom, Beeline, Pipe Metallurgical Company,
various scientific institutes, RAO UES, top-10 Russian banks, Russian Railways.
Now I implement not only what is narrowly connected with networks, but whole
complex infrastructural solutions from scratch. Depending on the project, these
are different solutions: for example, the construction of a data center, or the
implementation of a critical infrastructure.

In the beginning of my career I worked in a large Tyumen company, when I moved
to Moscow - I settled down at Bell Integrator, where I led a team of 370
people. With Bell, I moved to the US, where I needed a man like me to develop a
business. But now I decided to leave Bell, so that I finally had some free
time. Before that, I worked and studied for 10 years without interruption. Now
there was a family, additional activities, so I decided to free up time. In my
free time I teach people, I write books, I do self-development.

- To make it even clearer, what is your professional activity, tell us about
one of the most difficult projects.

- One of such projects is the creation of the Tyumen Regional Scientific
Library and the Regional Branch of the Presidential Library. The difficulty was
that both projects were closely linked and integrated with each other, but had
absolutely different requirements, both from the technical side and from the
organizational point of view. This is comparable to the fact that as if there
were separate cities in the countries of the European Union somewhere in
Russia, and vice versa, in Russia there were individual cities of Russia, and
not one but several.

Given the time frame and the number of components that were involved in this
project, it seemed initially impossible at all. The project itself took about
14 months to complete. It sounds like it's a long time, but if you subtract
from this numerous approvals from the authorities, the supply of equipment,
other bureaucratic costs, the delivery of the project and the training of the
staff of both libraries, there is no time left at all. At the same time, there
was a lot of equipment from hundreds of manufacturers. We installed 14,000
different components, including dozens of switches and routers, hundreds of
servers, thousands of end devices, tens of kilometers of wires and other
connecting elements - all that's just a small part of what was done within the
framework of this project.

The project was on the scale of not just a federal level, but one can say
international. So, the solution used a lot of innovative solutions, so some of
them came from accredited and certified specialists from other countries. This
created additional difficulties, since our methods of work were very different,
but we had to work together to fulfill our goal. For simple tasks, I never
took, and almost any project I ever had to participate in, always included a
complex and time-consuming work.

- Your success was noticed by Cisco itself. The company called for the
development of new certification exams. Tell me about it.

- I became the first third-party expert that Cisco invited. After they realized
that it worked for me, they began to apply the practice of inviting guests more
often. I several times personally participated in the development of such
certifications, as part of groups from other international IT experts. This is
a long and complex process. Which is logical - then specialists around the
world will be tested and prepared according to the materials developed by you.

The first stage of development of such examinations takes 5 full working days.
Invited already certified technical experts in their field from around the
world, invited people who have a certain weight in the IT industry. They are
locked in the conference room, completely isolated from the outside world for
maximum effect. Since we are talking about the development of educational
content, at the first stage there is always an expert on social and
psychological disciplines - usually a doctor of psychological sciences with
many years of experience, which adjusts the course of events from a
psychological point of view. As a result, all experts unanimously come to the
project, which already at the subsequent stages develops training materials and
on which the creation of the exams themselves is.

The subsequent stages take an average of 9-12 months. More than a hundred
people of different levels participate in this. These examinations consist of
both theoretical and practical parts, so you can understand that the process is
rather complex and time-consuming, and a specialist who passed such an exam is
ready to perform complex and complex tasks in his field. That is why any
position in IT around the world has in the requirements of magical CCIE, JNCIE,
HCIE or RHCA.

- When you learn new skills, how do you support the level of the expert?

- It is necessary to do basically free time from work. I am engaged in writing
books, technical articles, giving interviews to various publishing houses,
helping young IT professionals around the world to make the right choice in
their endeavor, as well as training already held experts in the IT industry.
Every day, I receive job offers, various requests for participation in
conferences, and letters of gratitude from all over the world, and they are
very difficult to ignore. There is very little free time, but I try to give
advice to the beginners and to be for them what Lapukhov was for me. All this
activity helps to develop.

- What is important when moving to the US?

- The higher the level of English, the easier it will be to adapt, work and
live. But in general it certainly depends on the position and responsibilities.
In my case, strong communication skills were needed, as it was necessary to
meet with large customers at the level of senior management, vice presidents
and general directors. And this required fluency in English. One distinguishing
feature is that such meetings in Russia usually take place in accordance with
business etiquette, often in office premises. In the US, basically, such
meetings take place in bars, cafes or a restaurant for a mug of tea, or even
beer. And the absolute norm is the discussion of some ordinary and everyday
things.

- What is the general forecast for the industry?

- Almost every day I get more and more questions from both beginners and from
already experienced IT specialists about the prospects of open source
solutions. If 15 years ago, open source software was used in a rather limited
form and narrow spheres, being something incomprehensible, to date its
experience with it is almost a basic skill for any IT specialist, including
network specialists. In network technology, especially in the States, there is
an active transition to open source solutions with proprietary software. There
is literally a tectonic shift towards free software. Previously, an
overwhelming number of companies used iron with the vendor's software. This is
called vendor lock. The model in which you can not get away from the decisions
of a specific vendor and you fall into a trap. Specialists and contracts are
tied to it, it is very restrictive. But now more and more manufacturers are
selling simply platforms without software. For example, a switch for 100 ports,
but without OS. And you choose software, decide what to do, how to do it. And
such solutions are very well integrated into automation systems.

More and more solutions are based or very tightly integrated with open source
solutions. There are many examples, but the fact that the largest companies and
sworn enemies of open source software - such as Microsoft - invest millions of
dollars and use open source software to solve their problems speaks volumes.
They admitted that they lost this battle. According to my forecasts, the trend
will only increase, further open source will penetrate deeper into all spheres.
Still, the community is always stronger than a separate company.

I also forecast that in the future the companies will start switching to local
cloud data centers. If the company has a large enough turnover, it will be more
profitable for it to realize its cloud. This will also be associated with the
penetration of open source software into all spheres. In parallel, the entire
industry will continue to scale automation. There will be a great interest in
different specialists with programming skills. For example, on network
professionals with skills in cloud solutions, devaps, and automation. But the
main trend is open source.


Original Article located at https://hightech.fm/2017/12/29/zuev
" | less
